The Joe Rogan experience.
I got a text from Pete brat, the OG, my buddy and Pete brat.
Let me know about your background. Like I did not know you were a fighter pilot.
I did not know that you did you work at area 51.
I cannot confirm or deny that <laugh> whoa. I worked at Ellis air space,
which is okay in that general vicinity. So.
So you can't talk about like experimental or anything.
Like that. You know what I did, the first thing I did at,
at Ellis was when I flew in the Thunderbirds. Right.
And then I went away for a couple assignments. And then when I came back,
I was an aggressor. And if you remember the movie, top gun, you know,
Viper and all those guys that were the camouflage planes,
they act as the enemy forces and trained blue forces before they go off to
comment. That's what I did the second time around.
So the NES ranges are probably up in that general vicinity.
But as far as being someone that worked at that, no,
I worked at Nellis air force base. Oh, okay. We flew in that. Okay.
In that general area, but.
I don't believe you. I think you're lying now. Now I think you're holding back.
You, did you feel it, Jamie? All of a sudden he's like smiling.
I don't some of the answers to the question.
You guys don't want guys in dark suits and shades to come in here and be like,
uh, Mr. Smith, we needed, I already.
Talked to those dudes. They're good guys.
They're just trying to protect us from the aliens. You know.
The crazy thing is in, in that area,
when people used to think they would see UFOs and stuff like that, you know,
there's a book that came out a couple years ago called red Eagles that explained
a lot of that stuff going on and what they thought were UFOs or, you know,
transportation planes that were landing at some of the bases and stuff up.
There. Yeah. A lot of people see wacky. Yeah.
The first time I ever saw a stealth bomber, I was, uh, it,
I was filming at fear factor in, um, Palmdale mm-hmm <affirmative>, which is,
uh, near, was it Edwards at right by Edwards? Yeah. Yeah.
And I saw a stealth bomber flying overhead and I swear to God,
I thought it was Darth Vader. When you see one of those things in real life,
you would think,
especially if you didn't know mm-hmm <affirmative> that the United States was
developing one of those,
like when they were first developing them and flying them before they made it
public mm-hmm <affirmative> that thing looks like it's from another world.
So it's part of you say that. So when I was on Thunderbirds,
we do incentivize for like media personalities and other people.
And I was out at our training area,
which is over death valley and we're talking to the Navy controllers and they
come over and say, you know, I was Thunderbird too. T-Bird two.
I need you to fly straight in level for five minutes.
So there's gonna be aircraft off your nose. I need you to, you know,
diverge to the right to stay away from it. And I'm like,
what in the world is this? So I threw my radar out there,
which just snack anything out there and I'm getting these intermittent hits and
I go, I don't see anything on the radar. Next thing you know,
I look up and I go, what the has happened. And I look up and it's a B2 that has,
you know, a escort plane right next to it. That comes right next to,
and I looked at it for the first time and I go, there's,
there're aliens out here. This is some kind of space.
Look at that thing. Yeah. I mean, look at that.
That does not look like it's from here. Yep.
That absolutely looks like it's from another world. Yeah. Like all those,
when people talk about seeing those triangular spacecrafts in the sky,
I mean maybe some of 'em are from another planet.
But yeah. So if you've never seen one of those and like,
for me as a pilot perspective, I'd never seen anything like that. You know,
you hear about the F one 17 from the golf war and you see this big thing coming
towards you. And that's.
What everybody always reports too.
A triangular object with like th a light on each corner. I mean,
that is a stealth bomber. Yep. That's a crazy looking in aircraft, man.
Yeah. So I had somebody in my backseat that was like, oh my God, what is that?
What is that thing coming.
By? And I mean,
if we thought that we were being invaded and then you saw things like that,
flying overhead, that that is what I would imagine. They would be flying.
They came from.
Another plane. That thing is out at Whiteman air force base. You know,
you see it flying out there all the time. So they're folks here in a local area,
they'll see it taken off and.
Some new ones that they haven't released yet.
I don't know. So I retired about eight years ago. Right. I heard a crazy story.
One day that someone was hunting up in Montana and saw something similar to
that, that he had never seen before that like came out of the ground in like a
vertical type thing and then took off, which, you know,
the F 35 and planes like that will take off some of them vertical stance and
then go forward.
But to see something that size and that scale do something like that,
it kinda makes me wish I was still in the military.
Just so you be in the know that's right. What,
so which one can do that and take off the F 35.
Yeah. So there are a couple variance. Um,
so the air force one does traditional rolling takeoff, but the Marine one,
you know, is almost like a Harrier. So the, the back engine will rotate.
So it'll take off vertical. And then as it's going forward,
the engine will rotate back the other way to give it forward propulsion.
But man, just technology wise, the stuff that we're flying now.
So I will tell you this,
the first time I fought on the range against the F 22 Raptor and I fought
against everything in the world. So out of Nels with aggressors,
everybody comes there to train, to get prepared for combat.
There's no better plane in the world than a F 22. When that thing passed me.
And some of the stuff that I saw it could do, I go,
there's no better plane in the world. So as far as air superiority,
F 22 is at the top of the.
Food chain. What is the difference? It's.
F 22 is primarily air superiority, you know, so like air to air,
dog fighting long range range, missiles, uh, F 35 is, you know,
a command and control platform. It still has weapons on it can drop bombs,
shoot missiles, et cetera. But the role is a little bit different. So yeah,
that's F 22, you go to a air show and see that thing you're like,
is that a plane or a helicopter with some of the stuff that it does,
but fighting against that, you know, as a fighter pilot,
your average fighter pilot is a cockiest person that you were ever it in the
world, just like top gun.
Exactly. Like the movie, that's all real. We're better.
Than everybody. That's our philosophy, but it is very happy.
You have to have that philosophy. Right. I mean, look at that, look at that.
That's insane. Oh my God, that's insane.
It just shoots straight up in the sky. Yep. Oh my God. I mean,
it doesn't even look like a real, a real.
Plane that, that is mean machine right there.
So I got friends that fly that plane and, you know,
you see it a it's designed in combat, you know,
the United States is still gonna be at the top of the food chain, as far as the,
the personnel that we have, the men and women that fly these airplanes,
and then the equipment that we're flying,
you're not gonna find anything to match. It.
That's incredible that turn that it just made in the sky. So is that what the,
the maneuverability of it is that what's superior? What the.
<Laugh> why does it do that? That's insane. So thrust factoring on the back,
you know, plus the flight controls. I mean, look, he just flat plated that,
and wow. The amount of thrust is coming out of it. So, you know,
internal avionics, the stealth capability and the maneuverability of it,
nothing, the world is gonna be that, but.
The, they can't fly very long. Right.
You know, uh, it's, it's a total package.
So whenever you go to combat or something,
you're gonna have tanker support out there. So you're gonna meet a, you know,
a airy fueler up at 20,000 feet and get gas and I think can external fuel tanks.
Uh, but the goal is to be able to plan the mission, to be able to go in escort,
have guys drop your bombs or do whatever and get back out with tanker support.
You know, there's always that philosophy without the gas, you know,
no one is gonna go. So like when I was in Iraq and stuff,
we take off in Saudi Arabia, fly a hour up, meet a tanker,
go fly our mission, come back to the tanker, get more gas,
go out and fly for another couple hours and then go back to the base.
How long can.
That fly for? You.
Know, I don't know. It obviously depends on how hard you got the gas pedal down.
Right? Right. I, I think in the F 16, if we stayed in full after burner for,
you know, five minutes, you probably run outta gas five minutes,
or it could be quicker than that. Now the goal is endurance.
You obviously want be able to stay out there to maintain the yeah. You know,
go the length of your mission. Um,
but you look at the length of the mission and fuel capacity.
And the goal is obviously to have somebody there as a backup,
cuz you never wanna be out there by yourself.
You always wanna have that support. You know?
So you may have guys that that's sitting back here in a, a,
a cap waiting for their turn to come in, you run outta gas up front.
Now you swap out those guys come back in. So total protection. So.
Until they come up with something superior to internal combustion engines,
we're always gonna be limited by the amount of fuel that they can carry.
Exactly. Just because of the weight. Right?
So as far as endurance, yes. Now capabilities of the plane, most fire,
the planes have a G capability of nine GS. And as you know,
time's a force of gravity. Do you wear.
A GSU.
When you're in there wear GSU? So in a fourth generation,
like a F 15 F 16 is a fourth generation fighter.
We wore G suits on the abdomen and down on the legs.
And basically what that does as you pull GS,
you're going against gravity and blood starts to drain from your brain down into
your lower extremities. So the GSU is just a capability to help counter it.
It's really a tightening restriction of your muscles, starting with your calves,
hamstrings, buttocks, all the way up. And we do the hooking. Yeah. The,
the hook you hook and that's really to hold the oxygen in.
And what that does is lock everything down to hopefully hold the blood up and
your brain as long as possible.
I told you, I flew with the blue angels once mm-hmm <affirmative>.
And when I did that, I,
I got to seven and a half GS mm-hmm <affirmative> before I couldn't take it
anymore. So.
Did you start to gray out or did it start the tunnel.
Vision? Yeah. It was like an elevator door was closing. Yeah. And you know,
I'm doing that. Who do do.
So it's weird because people think it's, you know,
two GS would be one greater than one,
three GS is one greater than two. But when you start to get above five,
it's not a plus one. It's exponential. Oh. So when you start to.
Get to seven, so six is 10. Oh.
Yeah. That's what, what it feels like. Yeah. And,
and you can't explain how it feels, but non GS is absolutely.
I mean, you get back home that night and from straining and everything,
you know, measles, what? It looks like little,
we call 'em geasles where your blood vessels will actually start to pop. Oh wow.
And you get these little specs on from strain is so hard that you're popping
blood vessels, but the goal is obvious not to fall asleep.
We call a fall asleep in airplane G uh, GLAS of consciousness. Uh,
G lock is what it's called. If you do that and you're in the air,
it may take you 30 seconds to a minute to be able to come back to any kind of
capacity. And if that happens, you know,
majority of the time is gonna be catastrophic. I.
Uh, made it through that.
And then I blacked out on the way back mm-hmm <affirmative> because I didn't
whole hook on the way back. Cause I thought I, I got cocky.
I thought we're good. And we made a hard turn.
And I think I blacked out at like five Uhhuh, like four and a half or five.
It wasn't even that much compared to seven and a half.
Yeah. If you're not ready at four, you know, people like, oh, I can do GS.
You get on a rollercoaster. That's like a half a G or one G black stick it at.
Exponential. And I threw up, it was double.
Embarrassing. Did they make you wear GSU? No, no. GSU see,
the reason they don't wear a GSU is because in close formation,
if you wear a GSU,
the GSU is gonna fill with air to help with that restriction on your legs. Mm.
And in the F 18,
they have a center control stick and they rest their arm on it is the right leg.
And if that GSU is moving up and down, it's gonna move your control stick. Oh,
I see.
So the F 16 has a side stick controller where it doesn't touch your leg at all.
I mean,
it's like you're reclined back in the seat and the side stick controller so we
can wear a GSU. So won't affect precision, you know,
moving your arm back and forth.
Is there any other technology that they've invented to deal with gravity like
that? Just the sheer force of the.
Acceleration. So not just to GSU, uh, but you will have, uh,
induced pressure breathing, you know,
so you wear a specific kind of oxygen mask and that's gonna force air into your
system. Cuz the one thing you would hate to do is just hold your breath.
It's like a three second count. You know,
you did that hook and then it's a three second count, exhale inhale right quick.
And as part of that pressure breathing, would you exhale and open your mouth?
It's gonna force air in with that pressure breathing system. Mm.
So with the two of those together, and then we combine it with,
you gotta be in shape, you know, you gotta lift weight,
you gotta have some kind of cardio conditioning to be able to last cuz it's one
thing to be strong enough to hold that, you know, G position.
But then you do a 45 minute, you know, dark fighting mission.
Your body's gonna get tired.
So you gotta be able to sustain that the entire time.
So most fighter pilots are gonna lift ways. They're gonna do, you know,
extreme cardio exercises to be able to sustain. But anything else,
other than that, it was kind of weird back in the day,
it would be go drink a Coke and a bag of Doritos and get that sugar rush for
that 45 minute flight and be able to sustain through it really.
It's more of a health conscious, uh, thing. Now, you know,
the total pack is stand in shape.
I guess they're just smarter now about it probably a lot.
The blue angel guy that I flew with was a tank and they dude was S SW,
he was like Yoel Romero. He was jacked. You.
Know, that was philosophy. Cuz when I was on the team, I'm six one,
I probably weigh 2 30, 2 35.
That's large, a fighter pilot. Right? The.
The cockpit was extremely tight.
Usually they're smaller guys because is that a thing with the, the,
the gravity it's easier to sustain.
Gravity. It, it is a, it's a height limitation.
So you can't be so tall where your head is up against the top of the canopy. Oh,
that's all it is.
But you also can't be that short where you can't see where the dashboard,
but there's a weight limitation too. You know,
can't be below a minimum weight because if you ever had to eject and you're
below, let's say 125 pounds, that parachute is gonna drag you,
you won't be able to stop. Oh. Or if you're above, you know, whatever,
the weight is 2 50, 2 65, you're gonna come down in that parachute pretty hard.
And you're.
Probably gonna get hurt. Yeah. They can't make custom for you. <laugh> Nope.
No. And it's the same basic fighter. So the Thunderbird, it's a, you know,
it's a frontline fighter that they take some,
they take the gun out and they put a smoke barrel in it,
but it's the same basic avionics, the same basic controls.
And it's just painted red, white and blue. Mm. You know,
all the professionals that are the maintenance guys for the Thunderbirds,
the best in the world, the finest in the world.
And I had four of the finest and I was on the team.
They take them off of active duty lines and bring them Elli air force base and
do all the of stuff on the planes, but.
Catch new episodes that Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps,
N can download episodes to save on data cost all for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.